:memo: Improve clarity of database backup on dedicated (#2362)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/development/transfer-dedicated.md

---
title: "Transfer data to and from a Dedicated cluster"
weight: 13
sidebarTitle: "Sync to Dedicated"
---

> Transferring data to and from a Dedicated cluster slightly differs from the grid.

Author: ```suggestion
Transferring data to and from [a Dedicated cluster](../../other/glossary.md#dedicated) slightly differs from the process on the Grid.
```

> Transferring data to and from a Dedicated cluster slightly differs from the grid.

Reviewer: :pick: This didn't seem to get applied.

> For advanced command line utilities, you might need granular SSH access to a specific host.

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: I would probably remove this line. It seems a little vague (it's unclear whether I'll need it or not and what exactly I'll need) and I'm not sure what it adds at the start.

## Back up your files

Platform.sh automatically creates backups of the Staging and Production environments of a Dedicated cluster every six hours.
These are only useful to fully restore an environment and are managed by the support team.

> You can make a manual, local, backup yourself by downloading data from your environment to your local system with:

Reviewer: Alternatively, could end with `by running the following command:`

> You can make a manual, local, backup yourself by downloading data from your environment to your local system with:

Author: ```suggestion
You can make a manual local backup yourself by downloading data from your environment to your local system by running the following command:
```

```bash

> platform scp --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<ENVIRONMENT> -r remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE> <LOCAL_DIRECTORY>

Reviewer: :pick: This would be one of very few places where we use the `=` in the commands. It's just a little surprising to see it. It also seems more confusing with the `remote:`, but that might be just me.

It's also below

```

> That command copies all files from the `<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>` directory in the environment you want to backup to your `<LOCAL_DIRECTORY>`. Before running the command, make sure that you don't overwrite local data (or do a backup first).

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
This command copies all files from the `<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>` in the environment you want to backup
to your `<LOCAL_DIRECTORY>`.
Before running the command, make sure that you don't overwrite local data (or do a backup first).
```
In one case there was `directory` after the variable and in one case not. Seems less than ideally clear, but not a major point.

## Back up your database

To backup your database, you need to adapt and run the following command on your local computer:

```bash
platform db:dump --gzip --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<ENVIRONMENT> 
```

> For more options, see [database export](../add-services/_index.md#exporting-data).

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: I'm not certain what the link is intended to point to, since there isn't a section like that on the [add services page](https://docs.platform.sh/add-services.html).

Also, the link text doesn't work within the sentence. It is being treated as if it's a page name, rather than a part of the sentence as a whole.

## Synchronize files from Development to Staging/Production

To transfer data into either the Staging or Production environments,
you can download data from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Production environment.

{{< note theme="warning" >}}

Be aware that synchronizing files is a destructive operation that overwrites data.

> [Backup your files first](#back-up-your-files).

Reviewer: :question: The warning below specifies the `Production` database. Would a similar specification help here? Or even `Production/Staging`?

{{< /note >}}

1. To download data from your Development environment to your local system, adapt the following command:

> ```bash

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
````suggestion
   ```bash
````

   platform scp --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<DEVELOPMENT_ENVIRONMENT> -r remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE> <LOCAL_DIRECTORY>

> ```

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
````suggestion
   ```
````

> 2. To copy the local directory to the remote Production mount:

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
2. To copy the local directory to the remote Production mount, adapt the following command:
```

> ```bash
>    platform scp --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<PRODUCTION_ENVIRONMENT> -r <LOCAL_DIRECTORY> remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>
> ```

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
````suggestion
   ```bash
   platform scp --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<PRODUCTION_ENVIRONMENT> -r <LOCAL_DIRECTORY> remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>
   ```
````

## Synchronize a database from Development to Staging/Production

To synchronize a database into either the Staging or Production environments,

> you can export the database from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Production environment.

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
export the database from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Production environment.
```

{{< note theme="warning" >}}

Be aware that this is a destructive operation that overwrites data.
[Backup your Production database first](#back-up-your-database).

{{< /note >}}

To synchronize your database:

1. Export the Development database on your local computer:

   ```bash
   platform db:dump --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<DEVELOPMENT_ENVIRONMENT> --file=dump.sql
   ```

   For more options, see [database export](../add-services/_index.md#exporting-data).

2. Import the Development database dump file into the remote Staging/Production database:

   ```bash

>    platform sql --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<PRODUCTION_ENVIRONMENT> < dump.sql

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
   platform sql --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<ENVIRONMENT> < dump.sql
```
Since it's not just Production and including both would be too much

   ```

## Get SSH access

You can access a specific environment of your project via SSH [using the CLI](../development/cli/_index.md):

```bash
platform ssh --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<ENVIRONMENT>
```

For more granular connection options, [see SSH connection details](../development/ssh/_index.md#get-ssh-connection-details).

## Get the database details

For advanced used cases, you might want to get the database details manually.

To do so:

> 1. Access the specific environment you need with `platform ssh --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<ENVIRONMENT>`. See more [about SSH](#get-ssh-access).

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion
1. Access the specific environment you need by running `platform ssh --project=<PROJECT_ID> --environment=<ENVIRONMENT>`.
```
The link doesn't add additional information and I don't think it would be so relevant at this point in any case.

---
title: "Transfer data to and from a Dedicated cluster"
weight: 13
sidebarTitle: "Sync to Dedicated"
---

Transferring data to and from a Dedicated cluster slightly differs from the grid.

## Back up your files

Platform.sh automatically creates backups of the Staging and Production environments of a Dedicated cluster every six hours.
These are only useful to fully restore an environment and are managed by the support team.

You can make a manual local backup yourself by downloading data from your environment to your local system by running the following command:

```bash
platform scp --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <ENVIRONMENT> -r remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE> <LOCAL_DIRECTORY>
```

> This command copies all files from the `<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>` in the environment you want to backup

Reviewer: :clipboard: :arrow_forward: 
```suggestion
This command copies all files from the `<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>` in the environment you want to back up
```

to your `<LOCAL_DIRECTORY>`.
Before running the command, make sure that you don't overwrite local data (or do a backup first).

## Back up your database

To backup your database, adapt and run the following command on your local computer:

```bash
platform db:dump --gzip --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <ENVIRONMENT> 
```

> For more backup options and examples, see [MariaDB/MySQL](../add-services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data).

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: :arrow_forward: This is again using the page name as the link as opposed to part of the sentence. It's better to have a sentence that includes the information that the reader would want
```suggestion
For more backup options and examples, see how to [export data from an SQL database](../add-services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data).
```

## Synchronize files from Development to Staging/Production

To transfer data into either the Staging or Production environment,

> download data from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Production environment.

Reviewer: :pick: This ends with only `Production` but starts with `either`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
download data from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Production/Staging environment.
```

{{< note theme="warning" >}}

Be aware that synchronizing files is a destructive operation that overwrites data.

> [Backup your Staging/Production files first](#back-up-your-files).

Reviewer: :clipboard: :arrow_forward: 
```suggestion
[Back up your Staging/Production files first](#back-up-your-files).
```

{{< /note >}}

1. To download data from your Development environment to your local system, adapt the following command:

   ```bash
   platform scp --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <DEVELOPMENT_ENVIRONMENT> -r remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE> <LOCAL_DIRECTORY>
   ```

> 2. To copy the local directory to the remote Production mount, adapt the following command:

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
2. To copy the local directory to the remote Staging/Production mount, adapt the following command:
```

   ```bash

>    platform scp --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <PRODUCTION_ENVIRONMENT> -r <LOCAL_DIRECTORY> remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>

Reviewer: :pick: To get both Staging and Production
```suggestion
   platform scp --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <TARGET_ENVIRONMENT> -r <LOCAL_DIRECTORY> remote:<DIRECTORY_TO_SYNCHRONIZE>
```

   ```

## Synchronize a database from Development to Staging/Production

To synchronize a database into either the Staging or Production environment,

> export the database from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Production environment.

Reviewer: As above:
```suggestion
export the database from your Development environment to your local system and from there to your Staging/Production environment.
```

{{< note theme="warning" >}}

Be aware that this is a destructive operation that overwrites data.

> [Backup your Staging/Production database first](#back-up-your-database).

Reviewer: :clipboard: :arrow_forward: 
```suggestion
[Back up your Staging/Production database first](#back-up-your-database).
```

{{< /note >}}

To synchronize your database:

> 1. Export the Development database on your local computer:

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
1. Export the Development database to your local computer:
```

   ```bash
   platform db:dump --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <DEVELOPMENT_ENVIRONMENT> --file=dump.sql
   ```

>    For more backup options and examples, see [MariaDB/MySQL](../add-services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data).

Reviewer: As above:
```suggestion
   For more backup options and examples, see how to [export data from an SQL database](../add-services/mysql/_index.md#exporting-data).
```

2. Import the Development database dump file into the remote Staging/Production database:

   ```bash

>    platform sql --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <PRODUCTION_ENVIRONMENT> < dump.sql

Reviewer: As above:
```suggestion
   platform sql --project <PROJECT_ID> --environment <TARGET_ENVIRONMENT> < dump.sql
```

   ```

## What's next?

> For more granular connection options, [see SSH connection details](../development/ssh/_index.md#get-ssh-connection-details).

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
For more granular connection options, see [SSH connection details](../development/ssh/_index.md#get-ssh-connection-details).
```

---
title: "Transfer data to and from a Dedicated cluster"
weight: 13
sidebarTitle: "Sync to Dedicated"
---

> ## Get the SSH username and host

Author: That is correct, an introduction seems like a good idea. I amended that in the latest commit.
I don't think that a how-to-guide would be the proper approach here since not all steps are required in each use case 🤔

The SSH username and host are used to access your project per SSH.

> These can be retrieved either on [the management console](https://docs.platform.sh/administration/web/configure-environment.html#actions) or [via the CLI](https://docs.platform.sh/development/ssh.html#get-ssh-connection-details).

Reviewer: :bulb: 
Use just the CLI since the console section isn't clear on what part is what and they need to use the command line below anyway.

> ## Back up staging and production files

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
## Back up Staging and Production files
```

I believe these environments are proper nouns for Dedicated.

Platform.sh automatically creates a backup of the staging and production instances on a Dedicated cluster every six hours.
However, those are only useful for a full restore of the environment and can only be done by the support team.
At times, You want to make a manual backup yourself.

> First, you need the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host) for your environment.

Author: This one is a bit tricky indeed, I tried something in that direction. Please let me know if that works for you (lines 21, 35, 69, 109, 127).

echo $PLATFORM_RELATIONSHIPS | base64 --decode | json_pp
```

> Which gives a JSON output similar to:

Reviewer: :+1: / :hammer_and_wrench: I think this is a good improvement, but if you're going to do it here, you should also do it for the exact same phrase below (112)

]
```

> The values needed are:

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: I'd switch this to active/direct: `The values you need` or better: `You need the following values`

- `username` of your database (`<username>`).
- `password` of your database (`<password>`). If empty, remove the flag.

> - "path", which is the name of the database (`<dbname>`).

Author: The thought was to try to make it clearer from where the values are coming from, and what needs to be adapted. I attempted to make it clearer based on your feedback. Let me know what you think.

Now, adapt and run the following command on your local computer:

```bash

> ssh <USERNAME>@<CLUSTER_NAME>.ent.platform.sh 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u <username> -p<password> -h database.internal <dbname> | gzip' > database.gz

Author: Good call, I fixed them. Indeed it's clearer with full caps, I also very much like the idea to add `<var>` tags. Might be interesting for the future.

```

That runs a `mysqldump` command on the server, compresses it using `gzip`,
and streams the output to a file named `database.gz` on your local computer.

(If you'd prefer, `bzip2` and `xz` are also available.)

> Example with an empty database password:
> ```bash
> ssh <USERNAME>@<CLUSTER_NAME>.ent.platform.sh 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u user -h database.internal main | gzip' > database.gz
> ```
> 
> 

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Example with an empty database password:

```bash
ssh <USERNAME>@<CLUSTER_NAME>.ent.platform.sh 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u user -h database.internal main | gzip' > database.gz
```

```

:question: If it's going to be an example with real values, I'm not sure I'd keep the variables at the start. But maybe? Not sure if it's more confusing to have it in or out.

:nail_care: The introduction could be more of a full sentence rather than a fragment.

Author: I wasn't sure which values I should use for the enterprise cluster SSH. Do we have example values?

Reviewer: Here's an example ssh command for a Gen 2 cluster: `ssh 1.ent-ljj2omdt2mmuk-production-vohbr3y@ssh.eu-3.platform.sh`

Reviewer: See the context for an example SSH command for a Gen 2 cluster

]
```

> From which you need the following values:

Reviewer: :nail_care: 
```suggestion
From which you need the following values:

```

]
```

From which you need the following values:

- `username`
- `password` (not needed if empty)
- `path`: the database name (`<DATABASE_NAME>` in the example command below)

You also need the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host) for your environment.

Now, adapt and run the following command on your local computer:

```bash
ssh <SSH_USERNAME>@<host> 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u <USERNAME> -p <PASSWORD> -h <DATABASE_NAME> | gzip' > database.gz
```

> Which gives something similar to the following:
> {{< codetabs >}}

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Which gives something similar to the following:

{{< codetabs >}}
```

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: 
"Which gives" implies output. This is input rather than output.

---
title=Without a database password
file=none
highlight=bash
---

ssh 1.ent-1ab23cd4efghi-prod-a1bb2cd@ssh.eu-3.platform.sh 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u user -h database.internal main | gzip' > database.gz

<--->

---
title=With a database password
file=none
highlight=bash
---

ssh 1.ent-1ab23cd4efghi-prod-a1bb2cd@ssh.eu-3.platform.sh 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u user -p password -h database.internal main | gzip' > database.gz

{{< /codetabs >}}

> ## Synchronize files from development to staging/production

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion
## Synchronize files from Development to Staging/Production
```

To transfer data into either the staging or production environments,
you can either download it from your Platform.sh development environment to your local system first
or transfer it directly between environments using SSH-based tools (such as scp and rsync).

First, set up [SSH forwarding](./ssh/ssh-keys.md#forwarding-keys-by-default) by default for Platform.sh domains.

Then get the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host) for your environment.

Finally, run `platform ssh` with the production branch checked out to connect to the default development environment.

> Files are the easier data to transfer, and can be done with `rsync`.

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench:
```suggestion
You can transfer files with rsync:
```

Not sure what the comparison would be otherwise.

```bash
rsync -avzP pub/static/ <SSH_USERNAME>@<host>:pub/static/
```

Replace `pub/static` with the path to your files on system, such as `web/sites/default/files/`.
Note that rsync is very picky about trailing `/` characters.
Consult the rsync documentation for more that can be done with that command.

> ## Synchronize the database from development to staging/production

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion
## Synchronize a database from Development to Staging/Production
```

The database can be copied directly from the development environment to staging or production,
but doing so requires noting the appropriate credentials first on both systems.

You also need the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host) for your environment.

First, log in to the production environment over SSH:

```bash

> ssh <SSH_USERNAME>@<host>

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
ssh <SSH_USERNAME>@<HOST>
```

]
```

From which you need the following values:

- `username`
- `password` (not needed if empty)
- `path`: the database name (`<DATABASE_NAME>` in the example command below)

Then, for the environment you want to access, you need to get the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host).

Now, adapt and run the following command on your local computer:

```bash
ssh <SSH_USERNAME>@<SSH_HOST> 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u <USERNAME> -p <PASSWORD> -h <DATABASE_NAME> | gzip' > database.gz
```

The adapted version of the command could look similar to:

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Without a database password
file=none
highlight=bash
---

> ssh 1.ent-1ab23cd4efghi-prod-a1bb2cd@ssh.eu-3.platform.sh 'mysqldump --single-transaction -u user -h database.internal main | gzip' > database.gz

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: 
Note the `database.internal`. That's the `host`. That needs to be in the list above. Make sure it's present anywhere it needs to be.

}
```

The values needed are:
- `username` of your database (`<username>`).
- `password` of your database (`<password>`). If empty, remove the flag.

> - "path", which is the name of the database (`<dbname>`).

Reviewer: :clipboard: As above

}
```

From which you need the following values:
- `username`.
- `password`. If empty, remove the flag.
- `path`, which is the name of the database (`<DBNAME>` in the example command below).

Now, in a separate terminal log in to the development instance using `platform ssh`.
Run the same `echo` command as above to get the credentials for the database on the development instance.
(The JSON will be slightly different but again we're only interested in the username, password, host, and "path"/database name).

With the credentials from both databases,
we can construct a command that will export data from the development server
and write it directly to the Dedicated cluster's server.

```bash

> mysqldump -u <DEV_USER> -p<DEV_PASSWORD> -h <DEV_HOST> <DEV_DBNAME> --single-transaction | ssh -C <USERNAME>@<CLUSTER_NAME>.ent.platform.sh 'mysql -u <PROD_USER> -p<PROD_PASSWORD> -h <PROD_HOST> <PROD_DBNAME>'

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion
mysqldump -u <DEV_USER> -p <DEV_PASSWORD> -h <DEV_HOST> <DEV_DB_NAME> --single-transaction | ssh -C <USERNAME>@<CLUSTER_NAME>.ent.platform.sh 'mysql -u <PROD_USER> -p <PROD_PASSWORD> -h <PROD_HOST> <PROD_DB_NAME>'
```
And as above, perhaps `DATABASE`

}
```

From which you need the following values:

- `username`
- `password` (not needed if empty)
- `path`: the database name (`<DATABASE_NAME>` in the example command below)

You also need the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host) for your environment.

Now, in a separate terminal log in to the development instance using `platform ssh`.
Run the same `echo` command as above to get the credentials for the database on the development instance.
Again, we're only interested in the username, password, host, and "path"/database name.

With the credentials from both databases,
we can construct a command that exports data from the development server
and write it directly to the Dedicated cluster's server.

```bash

> mysqldump -u <DEV_USER> -p <DEV_PASSWORD> -h <DEV_HOST> <DEV_DATABASE_NAME> --single-transaction | ssh -C <SSH_USERNAME>@<host> 'mysql -u <PROD_USER> -p <PROD_PASSWORD> -h <PROD_HOST> <PROD_DATABASE_NAME>'

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
mysqldump -u <DEV_USER> -p <DEV_PASSWORD> -h <DEV_HOST> <DEV_DATABASE_NAME> --single-transaction | ssh -C <SSH_USERNAME>@<HOST> 'mysql -u <PROD_USER> -p <PROD_PASSWORD> -h <PROD_HOST> <PROD_DATABASE_NAME>'
```

That's a lot of `host`s. Maybe `SSH_HOST` for the one? And match that also above? Not sure if it's necessary :shrug:

}
```

From which you need the following values:

- `username`
- `password` (not needed if empty)
- `path`: the database name (`<DATABASE_NAME>` in the example command below)

Then, for the environment you want to access, you need to get the [SSH username and host](#get-the-ssh-username-and-host).

Now, in a separate terminal log in to the development instance using `platform ssh`.
Run the same `echo` command as above to get the credentials for the database on the development instance.

> Again, we're only interested in the username, password, host, and "path"/database name.

Reviewer: :lady_beetle:
I feel silly for missing this, but note that here `host` is necessary. And it also used twice in the command below. But it's not in the list for the production environment.
It should be both places with a note about which variable they are in the example command.

> Again, we're only interested in the username, password, host, and "path"/database name.

Reviewer: Oh wow, and it also should be in the first section. Will add a comment there.
